---
title: Docker on ¬(AWS, ubuntu): the missing doc
author: Clement Delafargue
tags: docker, ubuntu, exherbo
---

Because *reasons*, I've been playing a bit with Docker these last days. Docker
is a tool aimed at simplifying the use of containers (it uses LXC under the
box). Containers are presented as a lightweight alternative to VMs, using
process isolation instead of real virtualization. This is not a new idea, but
it gained hype because it allows mitigation of cost and performance issues
when using amazon web services.

Docker is touted as portable, but most of its use is centered around ubuntu.
Since the kernel is shared between the host and the containers, there is
strong coupling between the host and the container OSes. Since docker is
primarily designed to run over AWS VMs, ubuntu used to be the only supported
distro and is still the only officially supported distro.

For many reasons, I don't use ubuntu, I use a source-based distro called
exherbo (try it, it's awesome).

Docker is packaged for exherbo, but the "out of the box" experience outside
from ubuntu-land is a bit patchy. Unfortunately, the docker documentation does
not list the required options. The closest thing to an official list I've
found is a gentoo ebuild, but it's very incomplete.

Fortunately, [W Trevor King](http://blog.tremily.us/) went over the
documentation of the tools Docker uses (LXC, bridging, …) and made a list of
needed options.

So, you'll need:

    CONFIG_CGROUP_DEVICE=y
    CONFIG_MEMCG=y
    CONFIG_USER_NS=y
    CONFIG_UIDGID_STRICT_TYPE_CHECKS=y
    CONFIG_MM_OWNER=y
    CONFIG_NETFILTER_ADVANCED=y
    CONFIG_BRIDGE_NETFILTER=y
    CONFIG_NF_NAT=m
    CONFIG_NF_NAT_NEEDED=y
    CONFIG_NF_NAT_FTP=m
    CONFIG_NF_NAT_IRC=m
    CONFIG_NF_NAT_SIP=m
    CONFIG_NETFILTER_XT_MATCH_ADDRTYPE=m
    CONFIG_NF_NAT_IPV4=m
    CONFIG_IP_NF_TARGET_MASQUERADE=m
    CONFIG_NF_NAT_IPV6=m
    CONFIG_IP6_NF_TARGET_MASQUERADE=m
    CONFIG_STP=m
    CONFIG_BRIDGE=m
    CONFIG_BRIDGE_IGMP_SNOOPING=y
    CONFIG_VLAN_8021Q=m
    CONFIG_LLC=m
    CONFIG_DM_BUFIO=m
    CONFIG_DM_BIO_PRISON=m
    CONFIG_DM_PERSISTENT_DATA=m
    CONFIG_DM_THIN_PROVISIONING=m
    CONFIG_MACVLAN=m
    CONFIG_VETH=m
    CONFIG_DEVPTS_MULTIPLE_INSTANCES=y

To get docker running.

##Wait, there's more fun!

Unfortunately, pulling the latest ubuntu image from the docker index won't be
enough.

    docker pull ubuntu:latest
    docker run -i -t ubuntu /bin/bash
    # apt-get update && apt-get upgrade
    => failure

There are problems with `/dev/shm/`, and the fact that an update script tries
to update the `initrd`.

Long story short, `docker pull racker/precise-with-updates`.

Docker is fun, but still need some polishing to be able to using outside of
ubuntu-land.





<http://blog.tremily.us/posts/Docker/>

<https://journal.paul.querna.org/articles/2013/10/15/docker-ubuntu-on-rackspace/>

