posts/2012-10-31-hammertime-and-real-world-haskell-part-1.md, before:

---
title: Hammertime and real world haskell, part 1
author: Clément Delafargue
tags: fp, haskell
---

I've spent the last few evenings on a pet project,
[Hammertime](http://github.com/divarvel/hammertime). It's a CLI
time-tracker which allows me to collect data on how I use my time. I intend to
generate SVG reports later on.

For instance, before starting to read my news feeds:

    hammertime start personal news

Then, proceeding to read work-related emails:

    hammertime start work emails

For now, hammertime is just a helper to register events associated to a timestamp.
Its model is fully sequential (no parallel tasks). It uses a flat file to
store data.

Hammertime's feature set is arguably not the more important part of this
project.  Hammertime is my first "real" haskell project. By that I mean a
project that I will really use and which is inherently impure (to some extent
at least). Most of the haskell I write is usually based on one-liners typed in
``ghci``. With hammertime, I intend to bridge the gap between fun, purely
functional, highly abstract code (the kind of code I've never written outside
of haskell-land) and more concrete, everyday code, to see how Haskell's beauty
can help me in a more mundane task.

I intend to track my work on hammertime in a few posts to write about how real
world haskell development compares to other, mainstream workflows.

##Development environment

###Build tool

Most of the time I just load a ``.hs`` file from ``ghci`` and I get running.
This time, I've put up a cabal setup, just to keep track of the dependencies
and to quickly provide a usable executable (even though I can't visualize
data, I've started to collect some). However, hammertime is still in one file,
so I've kept cabal from my development workflow. Also, I must admit that I'm a
bit scared of its dependency management, which is bad,
[to say the least](http://www.txt.io/t-2kv5h). Fortunately, I use cabal only
for development, not for installing software. My distro has a fairly good
support of haskell
(see [Exherbo's haskell repository](http://git.exherbo.org/summer/repositories/haskell/index.html)).

That said, having fiddled with snap and yesod, cabal has always been a PITA
with conflicting dependencies. I've tried ``cabal-dev`` but rebuilding
everything for every new install was a huge time sink. I somehow miss the java
world with ``sbt`` and ``maven`` which handle these kinds of problems quite
well.

There is no real equivalent of sbt's REPL (which starts with the right
classpath), but I use a ``.ghci`` file wich makes ghci execute statements when
starting.

My reference for a good cabal layout was [Tony Morris' tic-tac-toe
example](https://github.com/tonymorris/course-answers), until I found
(precisely when writing down this very sentence) [Tony Morris'
haskell-package]( https://github.com/tonymorris/haskell-package). This
skeleton package provides a very good starting point for a package.

I've not yet written unit tests for hammertime (which is bad, I know), and I
must admit I'm a bit put off by how they're integrated in cabal. Again, I miss
``sbt`` for this.


###Playing with the code

I don't really like IDEs for lots of reasons (cf [IDEs are a language
smell](http://www.recursivity.com/blog/2012/10/28/ides-are-a-language-smell/))
and I've not used one for years. For a full-blown java dev, I would certainly
use one, but right now, I'm using languages expressive enough to avoid IDEs (I
even wrote a small java project from ``sbt`` the other day and played with it
via the ``REPL``, but that's another story).

Overall, I've been able to keep my habits: ``vim`` + ``ghci`` is a great combo
to play with code. One nice side effect is that it gives a strong incentive to
write really short top-level methods, which are easier to use in ghci.

Playing with side-effecting code in ghci is quite simple too. For instance:

    Prelude Data.Time> :t getCurrentTime
    getCurrentTime :: IO UTCTime

    Prelude Data.Time> getCurrentTime
    2012-10-30 22:30:32.980922 UTC

    Prelude Data.Time> :t it
    it :: UTCTime

With the special ``it`` variable, I directly have access to the unwrapped
``UTCTime`` value after it has been evaluated. This makes ``ghci`` even more
useful when trying new code.

I use ``pointfree`` from time to time to refactor lambdas into a more elegant
style. I'm quite cautious with this tool because it can produce cryptic
formulations, but from time to time it's useful.

###Documentation

Once again, it's quite the same for haskell or scala or JS, I just browse the
reference websites when I want to have precise info on some part of the API.
Since I'm quite new to haskell, my knowledge of the standard library is a bit
thin, and that's where [Hoogle](http://www.haskell.org/hoogle) is a *huge*
time-saver. [Yahoo](http://holumbus.fh-wedel.de/hayoo/hayoo.html) is more
useful for packages outside the standard lib, but for these I prefer to read
thoroughly the documentation.

Even though I almost know [LYAH](http://learnyouahaskell.com/) by heart and I
have a decent knowledge of common haskell constructs, I don't know anything
about basic stuff like writing to a file or reading command line args. That's
where [Real World Haskell](http://book.realworldhaskell.org/) is of tremendous
help. I've not read it completely yet because it frightened me a bit, but the
more I read it, the more I like the choices taken by its authors. They offer a
good vision of their process in end-to-end case studies.

I just wish they explained how to package Haskell software with cabal.

##Wrap up

Apart from the problems with cabal, developing in Haskell is a nice
experience. ``ghci`` and _hoogle_ are making me insanely more productive when
I'm in need of documentation. Hoogle is one of the best proofs that a good
type system is essential for readability. I may not have been as productive
with new libraries as I would have with an IDE and some ``C^Space`` magic, but
I've learned more about the libraries I'm using.


Next part will be about the thought project when prototyping haskell code.
I've found it to be quite different from the one I adopt when writing scala or
JS.

The code is [available on github](http://github.com/divarvel/hammertime). Feel
free to browse it and give me feedback. As I said, it's my first haskell
project and I'm eager to improve.

Commit message:

Add: paragraphs about cabal and hoogle

posts/2012-10-31-hammertime-and-real-world-haskell-part-1.md, after:

---
title: Hammertime and real world haskell, part 1
author: Clément Delafargue
tags: fp, haskell
---

I've spent the last few evenings on a pet project,
[Hammertime](http://github.com/divarvel/hammertime). It's a CLI
time-tracker which allows me to collect data on how I use my time. I intend to
generate SVG reports later on.

For instance, before starting to read my news feeds:

    hammertime start personal news

Then, proceeding to read work-related emails:

    hammertime start work emails

For now, hammertime is just a helper to register events associated to a timestamp.
Its model is fully sequential (no parallel tasks). It uses a flat file to
store data.

Hammertime's feature set is arguably not the more important part of this
project.  Hammertime is my first "real" haskell project. By that I mean a
project that I will really use and which is inherently impure (to some extent
at least). Most of the haskell I write is usually based on one-liners typed in
``ghci``. With hammertime, I intend to bridge the gap between fun, purely
functional, highly abstract code (the kind of code I've never written outside
of haskell-land) and more concrete, everyday code, to see how Haskell's beauty
can help me in a more mundane task.

I intend to track my work on hammertime in a few posts to write about how real
world haskell development compares to other, mainstream workflows.

##Development environment

###Build tool

Most of the time I just load a ``.hs`` file from ``ghci`` and I get running.
This time, I've put up a cabal setup, just to keep track of the dependencies
and to quickly provide a usable executable (even though I can't visualize
data, I've started to collect some). However, hammertime is still in one file,
so I've kept cabal from my development workflow. Also, I must admit that I'm a
bit scared of its dependency management, which is bad,
[to say the least](http://www.txt.io/t-2kv5h). Fortunately, I use cabal only
for development, not for installing software. My distro has a fairly good
support of haskell
(see [Exherbo's haskell repository](http://git.exherbo.org/summer/repositories/haskell/index.html)).

That said, having fiddled with snap and yesod, cabal has always been a PITA
with conflicting dependencies. I've tried ``cabal-dev`` but rebuilding
everything for every new install was a huge time sink. I somehow miss the java
world with ``sbt`` and ``maven`` which handle these kinds of problems quite
well.

There is no real equivalent of sbt's REPL (which starts with the right
classpath), but I use a ``.ghci`` file wich makes ghci execute statements when
starting.

My reference for a good cabal layout was [Tony Morris' tic-tac-toe
example](https://github.com/tonymorris/course-answers), until I found
(precisely when writing down this very sentence) [Tony Morris'
haskell-package]( https://github.com/tonymorris/haskell-package). This
skeleton package provides a very good starting point for a package.

I've not yet written unit tests for hammertime (which is bad, I know), and I
must admit I'm a bit put off by how they're integrated in cabal. Again, I miss
``sbt`` for this.

Cabal is able to provide all of that, but not out of the box.


###Playing with the code

I don't really like IDEs for lots of reasons (cf [IDEs are a language
smell](http://www.recursivity.com/blog/2012/10/28/ides-are-a-language-smell/))
and I've not used one for years. For a full-blown java dev, I would certainly
use one, but right now, I'm using languages expressive enough to avoid IDEs (I
even wrote a small java project from ``sbt`` the other day and played with it
via the ``REPL``, but that's another story).

Overall, I've been able to keep my habits: ``vim`` + ``ghci`` is a great combo
to play with code. One nice side effect is that it gives a strong incentive to
write really short top-level methods, which are easier to use in ghci.

Playing with side-effecting code in ghci is quite simple too. For instance:

    Prelude Data.Time> :t getCurrentTime
    getCurrentTime :: IO UTCTime

    Prelude Data.Time> getCurrentTime
    2012-10-30 22:30:32.980922 UTC

    Prelude Data.Time> :t it
    it :: UTCTime

With the special ``it`` variable, I directly have access to the unwrapped
``UTCTime`` value after it has been evaluated. This makes ``ghci`` even more
useful when trying new code.

I use ``pointfree`` from time to time to refactor lambdas into a more elegant
style. I'm quite cautious with this tool because it can produce cryptic
formulations, but from time to time it's useful.

###Documentation

Once again, it's quite the same for haskell or scala or JS, I just browse the
reference websites when I want to have precise info on some part of the API.
Since I'm quite new to haskell, my knowledge of the standard library is a bit
thin, and that's where [Hoogle](http://www.haskell.org/hoogle) is a *huge*
time-saver. [Yahoo](http://holumbus.fh-wedel.de/hayoo/hayoo.html) is more
useful for packages outside the standard lib, but for these I prefer to read
thoroughly the documentation. These tools allow me to *find functions based on
their type*. Since haskell's type system is really expressive and functions
are highly generic, most often the type describes exactly the feature.

Even though I almost know [LYAH](http://learnyouahaskell.com/) by heart and I
have a decent knowledge of common haskell constructs, I don't know anything
about basic stuff like writing to a file or reading command line args. That's
where [Real World Haskell](http://book.realworldhaskell.org/) is of tremendous
help. I've not read it completely yet because it frightened me a bit, but the
more I read it, the more I like the choices taken by its authors. They offer a
good vision of their process in end-to-end case studies.

I just wish they explained how to package Haskell software with cabal.

##Wrap up

Apart from the problems with cabal, developing in Haskell is a nice
experience. ``ghci`` and _hoogle_ are making me insanely more productive when
I'm in need of documentation. Hoogle is one of the best proofs that a good
type system is essential for readability. I may not have been as productive
with new libraries as I would have with an IDE and some ``C^Space`` magic, but
I've learned more about the libraries I'm using.


Next part will be about the thought project when prototyping haskell code.
I've found it to be quite different from the one I adopt when writing scala or
JS.

The code is [available on github](http://github.com/divarvel/hammertime). Feel
free to browse it and give me feedback. As I said, it's my first haskell
project and I'm eager to improve.
