posts/2014-03-31-create-clean-database-schemas-easily-with-jinx-database-tools.md, before:

---
title: Create clean database schemas easily with jinx Database Tools
author: Clement Delafargue
tags: haskell, sql
---

jinx Database Tools (or jdbt) is a small script designed to help design and
create database schemas by factoring out the boring parts which can be derived
automatically (primary keys, foreign keys, `not null` constraints).

The code is on github: <https://github.com/divarvel/jdbt>

You only have to describe the schema of your data in a concise language, and
jdbt automatically adds implicit constraints and generate full SQL output.

jDbT automatically adds a primary key if there is none explicitely declared.
It also detects foreign references, assumes that columns are not nullable by
default and allow a concise syntax for nullability, unicity contraints and enums.

For now, it outputs SQL (postgresql-compliant) and dot. I plan to add support
for play evolution scripts, haskell and scala records, and even dummy data to
populate the database.

```yaml
member_status: # declare an enum
    - waiting
    - confirmed

member: # Primary key automatically inferred
    name: text # not null by default
    +email: text # unicity constraint on email
    password_hash: text
    status: member_status | 'waiting' # default value

team: # Primary key automatically inferred
    +name: text # unicity constraint on name
    ?desciption: text # nullable description

member_team:
    member_id: # Foreign reference to member
    team_id: # Foreign reference to team
    __pk: [ member_id, team_id ] # manually declare a pk on (member_id, team_id)
```
The member and team entities don't declare a primary key, so jDbT infers
respectively `member_id` and `team_id`, both of type `uuid` as primary keys.

For `member_team.member_id` and  `member_team.team_id`, jdbt detects that they
are foreign keys, so it infers their type as `uuid` and adds a foreign
contraint.


    jdbt schema.yml > schema.sql
    jdbt schema.yml dot | dot -Tpng > schema.png

![](/files/jdbt-schema.png "database schema")

```sql
create type member_status as enum('waiting', 'confirmed');

create table member (
    member_id uuid primary key,
    name text not null,
    email text not null unique,
    password_hash text not null,
    status member_status  default  'waiting'::member_status  not null
);

create table team (
    team_id uuid primary key,
    name text not null unique,
    desciption text
);

create table member_team (
    member_id uuid not null references member(member_id),
    team_id uuid not null references team(team_id),
    primary key (member_id, team_id)
);

```

Commit message:

add Disclaimer on jdbt post

posts/2014-03-31-create-clean-database-schemas-easily-with-jinx-database-tools.md, after:

---
title: Create clean database schemas easily with jinx Database Tools
author: Clement Delafargue
tags: haskell, sql
---

jinx Database Tools (or jdbt) is a small script designed to help design and
create database schemas by factoring out the boring parts which can be derived
automatically (primary keys, foreign keys, `not null` constraints).

The code is on github: <https://github.com/divarvel/jdbt>

## Disclaimer

jdbt **does not** check the integrity of the model you describe. It is to be
used as a convenient tool to generate your schema. Don't rely too much on it.

You only have to describe the schema of your data in a concise language, and
jdbt automatically adds implicit constraints and generate full SQL output.

jDbT automatically adds a primary key if there is none explicitely declared.
It also detects foreign references, assumes that columns are not nullable by
default and allow a concise syntax for nullability, unicity contraints and enums.

For now, it outputs SQL (postgresql-compliant) and dot. I plan to add support
for play evolution scripts, haskell and scala records, and even dummy data to
populate the database.

```yaml
member_status: # declare an enum
    - waiting
    - confirmed

member: # Primary key automatically inferred
    name: text # not null by default
    +email: text # unicity constraint on email
    password_hash: text
    status: member_status | 'waiting' # default value

team: # Primary key automatically inferred
    +name: text # unicity constraint on name
    ?desciption: text # nullable description

member_team:
    member_id: # Foreign reference to member
    team_id: # Foreign reference to team
    __pk: [ member_id, team_id ] # manually declare a pk on (member_id, team_id)
```
The member and team entities don't declare a primary key, so jDbT infers
respectively `member_id` and `team_id`, both of type `uuid` as primary keys.

For `member_team.member_id` and  `member_team.team_id`, jdbt detects that they
are foreign keys, so it infers their type as `uuid` and adds a foreign
contraint.


    jdbt schema.yml > schema.sql
    jdbt schema.yml dot | dot -Tpng > schema.png

![](/files/jdbt-schema.png "database schema")

```sql
create type member_status as enum('waiting', 'confirmed');

create table member (
    member_id uuid primary key,
    name text not null,
    email text not null unique,
    password_hash text not null,
    status member_status  default  'waiting'::member_status  not null
);

create table team (
    team_id uuid primary key,
    name text not null unique,
    desciption text
);

create table member_team (
    member_id uuid not null references member(member_id),
    team_id uuid not null references team(team_id),
    primary key (member_id, team_id)
);

```
