posts/2014-09-13-of-conferences-and-cocs.md, before:

---
title: Of conferences and CoCs
author: Clement Delafargue
tags: adainitiative, code of conduct
---

<p>
<a href="https://supportada.org/?campaign=lambda"><img src="https://adainitiative.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/donate_red_small.png" width="185" height="54" alt="Donation button" /></a><br />
<a href="https://supportada.org/?campaign=lambda"><img src="https://adainitiative.org/counters/2014counter-lambda.svg" width="400" alt="Donate to the Ada Initiative"></a>
</p>

Codes of Conduct are an important part of making conferences safe for everyone
to attend. That's why I've pushed it for
[scala.io](http://scala.io/code-of-conduct.html), why I've set up one for my
office <https://github.com/companycampus/policies> and why I've publicly asked
<http://devoxx.fr> to have one.

Of course, just having a code of conduct is not enough. Conferences need to
publicize their CoCs to really make them useful.

That's why I'm taking part with [Tim Chevalier](http://tim.dreamwidth.org/1856739.html),
[Adam Foltzer](http://tim.dreamwidth.org/1856828.html), Eric Meritt and
[Chung-chieh (Ken) Shan](http://conway.bostoncoop.net/~ccshan/wiki/blog/posts/lambda4ada/)
in a challenge. There are two goals: raise **$4096** for the Ada
Initiative, and call on the ACM to publicize and implement their
anti-harassment policy in all of their conferences.


To help, you can:

- Donate to the Ada Initiative <http://supportada.org?campaign=lambda> before
  Friday, September 19, 5:00PM (Pacific Time)
- Ask the ACM to consistently publicize their Anti-Harassment Policy for all
  their conferences by tweeting something along these lines: 


> I donated to @adainitiative http://supportada.org?campaign=lambda b/c I want @theOfficialACM events to publicize their Anti Harassment Policy #lambda4ada


For more information, please check [Tim's article](http://tim.dreamwidth.org/1856739.html).

Commit message:

Edit / thank you note for the lambda4ada challenge

posts/2014-09-13-of-conferences-and-cocs.md, after:

---
title: Of conferences and CoCs
author: Clement Delafargue
tags: adainitiative, code of conduct
---

## Edit 2014-09-22

The fund raising went quite well, the orginal goal of $4096 was reached in
about 5 hours. The goal was stretched to $8192 and then $10000 before the end
of the challenge. No news from
[@theOfficialACM](https://twitter.com/theOfficialACM) though.

Thank you to everyone who's donated, whatever the amount, and thank you to
everyone who helped us publicize this action.

## Original article

<p>
<a href="https://supportada.org/?campaign=lambda"><img src="https://adainitiative.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/08/donate_red_small.png" width="185" height="54" alt="Donation button" /></a><br />
<a href="https://supportada.org/?campaign=lambda"><img src="https://adainitiative.org/counters/2014counter-lambda.svg" width="400" alt="Donate to the Ada Initiative"></a>
</p>

Codes of Conduct are an important part of making conferences safe for everyone
to attend. That's why I've pushed it for
[scala.io](http://scala.io/code-of-conduct.html), why I've set up one for my
office <https://github.com/companycampus/policies> and why I've publicly asked
<http://devoxx.fr> to have one.

Of course, just having a code of conduct is not enough. Conferences need to
publicize their CoCs to really make them useful.

That's why I'm taking part with [Tim Chevalier](http://tim.dreamwidth.org/1856739.html),
[Adam Foltzer](http://tim.dreamwidth.org/1856828.html), Eric Meritt and
[Chung-chieh (Ken) Shan](http://conway.bostoncoop.net/~ccshan/wiki/blog/posts/lambda4ada/)
in a challenge. There are two goals: raise **$4096** for the Ada
Initiative, and call on the ACM to publicize and implement their
anti-harassment policy in all of their conferences.


To help, you can:

- Donate to the Ada Initiative <http://supportada.org?campaign=lambda> before
  Friday, September 19, 5:00PM (Pacific Time)
- Ask the ACM to consistently publicize their Anti-Harassment Policy for all
  their conferences by tweeting something along these lines: 


> I donated to @adainitiative http://supportada.org?campaign=lambda b/c I want @theOfficialACM events to publicize their Anti Harassment Policy #lambda4ada


For more information, please check [Tim's article](http://tim.dreamwidth.org/1856739.html).
